bathtub
=======

The Bathtub Mechanism (Cancer Research Project)

Cancer cells frequently, perhaps always in some cases, have an
abnormal number of chromosomes, often about double the normal number.
The Bathtub Mechanism is a theoretical mechanism to selectively kill
cells with too many (or too few) chromosomes -- or indeed any
numerical abnormality.

Most healthy people have twenty-three pairs of chromosomes (46 total)
in each cell.  A small minority have one or two extra or too few
chromosomes.  Cancers cells often, perhaps always in some cases, have
an abnormal number of chromosomes, often about double the normal
number -- around eighty to ninety chromosomes.  This abnormal number
of chromosomes is known as aneuploidy.

The Bathtub Mechanism works in analogy to an old-fashioned bathtub
with two faucets and a single drain with a limited capacity.  Turn on
one faucet full and the drain will be able to remove the water as it
is added.  The water level in the bathtub remains low, less than an
inch.  Turn on both faucets full and the drawin will not be able to
remove the water as it is added, the water level rises and the bathtub
overflows.

In the Bathtub Mechanism, each chromosome is a "faucet" adding a mild
toxin to the cell -- ideally a chemical that is not toxic in low
concentrations at all.  The concentration of the cell killer is
analogous to the water level in the bathtub.  A drain is added to the
cell.  In cells with the normal number of chromosomes, the
concentration of the cell killer toxin remains very low.  In cells
with double the normal number of chromosomes, the concentration of the
cell killer toxin builds up to lethal levels because the drain cannot
remove the toxin rapidly enough.

This project contains simulation software for the Bathtub Mechanism.

Author/Point of Contact: John F. McGowan, Ph.D. (jmcgowan79@gmail.com)

About the Author

John F. McGowan, Ph.D. solves problems using mathematics and
mathematical software, including developing gesture recognition for
touch devices, video compression and speech recognition
technologies. He has extensive experience developing software in C,
C++, MATLAB, Python, Visual Basic and many other programming
languages. He has been a Visiting Scholar at HP Labs developing
computer vision algorithms and software for mobile devices. He has
worked as a contractor at NASA Ames Research Center involved in the
research and development of image and video processing algorithms and
technology. He has published articles on the origin and evolution of
life, the exploration of Mars (anticipating the discovery of methane
on Mars), and cheap access to space. He has a Ph.D. in physics from
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and a B.S. in physics
from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). He can be
reached at jmcgowan79@gmail.com
